---
title: Descriptive, Prescriptive, Predictive
date: 2024-03-16
tags: product
---

The arc of a product team cycles through three mindsets: descriptive,
predictive, and predictive. There are other ways to describe this arc, but I
like this one because it rhymes.

Product teams are _descriptive_ when they are finding what is known as "Product
Market Fit". They _describe_ a a pain point in the world around them and find a
solution for it. This mindset helps capture mind share and to get in the door.

Product teams become _prescriptive_ when they make choices about how their
product should and should not be used -- or rather, how it _can_ or cannot be
used. This is a complex hierarchy of tradeoffs between the features of the
product as well as an alignment to the underlying vision. For example a product
_could_ do more things, but it doesn't because that would dilute its brand or
make it confusing or otherwise take away from the problem it hoped to solve in
the first place. This mindset of _prescribing_ helps product begins a two-way
dialog with customers, and helps orient the team towards the same narrative.

Product teams become _predictive_ when they attempt to solve problems that do
not yet exist in the minds of their customers. Another way to think about this
is that they build on top of the new world that is created after incorporating
their solution. Solving problems that exist in the world is not a pure function.
In other words, solving problems with solutions (even if they are perfect) has
side effects. Sometimes those side effects creates new opportunities and product
teams can predict these problems and get ahead of them with new solutions, even
before they have become clear.

I think the predictive phase of product development is particularly magical,
because that's how you (forgive the clich√©), change the world.
